Japan's trap

PK Home 

JAPAN'S TRAP

Paul Krugman
May 1998

Japan's economic malaise is first and foremost a problem for Japan itself.But it also poses problems for others: for troubled Asian economies desperatelyin need of a locomotive, for Western advocates of free trade whose jobis made more difficult by Japanese trade surpluses. Last and surely least- but not negligibly - Japan poses a problem for economists, because thissort of thing isn't supposed to happen. Like most macroeconomists who sometimesstep outside the ivory tower, I believe that actual business cycles aren'talways real business cycles, that some (most) recessions happen becauseof a shortfall in aggregate demand. I and most others have tended to assumethat such shortfalls can be cured simply by printing more money. Yet Japannow has near-zero short-term interest rates, and the Bank of Japan haslately been expanding its balance sheet at the rate of about 50% per annum- and the economy is still slumping. What's going on?

There have, of course, been many attempts to explain how Japan has founditself in this depressed and depressing situation, and the government ofJapan has been given a lot of free advice on what to do about it. (A usefulsummary of the discussion may be found in a set of notes by NourielRoubini . An essay by JohnMakin seems to be heading for the same conclusion as this paper, butsheers off at the last minute). The great majority of these explanationsand recommendations, however, are based on loose analysis at best, purelyimplicit theorizing at worst. Japan is depressed, we are told, becauseof too much corporate debt, or the refusal of banks to face up to theirlosses, or the overregulation of the service sector, or the aging of itspopulation; recovery requires tax cuts, or a massive bank reform, or maybecannot be achieved at all until the economy has painfully purged itselfof excess capacity. Some or all of these propositions may be true; butit is hard to know unless we have some clear framework for understandingthe current predicament.

Economists of a certain age - basically my age and up - do have a theoreticalframework of sorts for analyzing the situation: Japan is in the dreaded"liquidity trap", in which monetary policy becomes ineffectivebecause you can't push interest rates below zero. The celebrated paperby Hicks (1937) that introduced the IS-LM model also showed, in the contextof that model, how monetary policy might become ineffective under depressionconditions. And for a long time macroeconomists kept the liquidity trapin mind as an important theoretical possibility, if not something one waslikely to encounter in practice. But the IS-LM model, while it continuesto be the workhorse of practical policy analysis in macroeconomics, hasincreasingly been treated by the profession as a sort of embarrassing relative,not fit to be seen in polite intellectual company. After all, even asidefrom the dependence of IS-LM analysis on the ad hoc assumption of priceinflexibility, that analysis is at best a very rough attempt to squeezefundamentally intertemporal issues like saving and investment into a staticframework (a point which, incidentally, Hicks noted right at the beginning).As a result, IS-LM has been hidden away in the back pages of macroeconomictextbooks, given as little space as possible; and curiosa like the liquiditytrap have been all but forgotten.

But here we are with what surely looks a lot like a liquidity trap inthe world's second-largest economy. How could that have happened? Whatdoes it say about policy? For in a way the criticisms of IS-LM are right:it is too ad hoc, too close to assuming its conclusions to give us thekind of guidance we want. Indeed, many economists probably have doubtsabout whether anything like a liquidity trap is actually possible in amodel with better microfoundations.

The purpose of this paper is to show that the liquidity trap is a realissue - that in a model that dots its microeconomic i's and crosses itsintertemporal t's something that is very much like the Hicksian liquiditytrap can indeed arise. Moreover, the conditions under which that trap emergescorrespond, in at least a rough way, to some features of the real Japaneseeconomy. To preview the conclusions briefly: in a country with poor long-rungrowth prospects - for example, because of unfavorable demographic trends- the short-term real interest rate that would be needed to match savingand investment may well be negative; since nominal interest ratescannot be negative, the country therefore "needs" expected inflation.If prices were perfectly flexible, the economy would get the inflationit needs, regardless of monetary policy - if necessary by deflating nowso that prices can rise in the future. But if current prices are not downwardlyflexible, and the public expects price stability in the long run, the economycannot get the expected inflation it needs; and in that situation the economyfinds itself in a slump against which short-run monetary expansion, nomatter how large, is ineffective.

If this stylized analysis bears any resemblance to the real problem facingJapan, the policy implications are radical. Structural reforms that raisethe long-run growth rate (or relax non-price credit constraints) mightalleviate the problem; so might deficit-financed government spending. Butthe simplest way out of the slump is to give the economy the inflationaryexpectations it needs. This means that the central bank must make a crediblecommitment to engage in what would in other contexts be regarded as irresponsiblemonetary policy - that is, convince the private sector that it will notreverse its current monetary expansion when prices begin to rise!

This paper is in six parts. It begins by describing an extremely stylizedfull-employment model of money, interest, and prices, a simplified versionof Lucas (1982). The next section shows that while under normal circumstancesprices in this model are proportional to the money supply, even when pricesare perfectly flexible there is a maximum rate of deflation thatcannot be exceeded no matter what the central bank does. And this maximumrate of deflation can be negative - that is, under certain well-definedcircumstances the economy needs inflation, and with flexible prices willget it regardless of monetary policy. 

The third part introduces short-run price inflexibility, and shows thatwhen an economy "needs" inflation, temporary monetary expansion- defined as expansion that does not raise the long-run price level - iscompletely ineffectual at increasing output. It is in this sense that aneconomy can indeed suffer from a liquidity trap. The fourth part then arguesthat making the analysis a bit less stylized - introducing investment andinternational trade - does not alter the basic conclusions: neither investmentnor even the possibility of exporting excess savings to other countriesnecessarily eliminate the possibility of a liquidity trap. The fifth sectionargues that despite the highly stylized nature of the analysis, it doesshed considerable light on Japan's quandary. Finally, the last part considerspolicy implications, especially the apparent implication that Japan mayneed to adopt more inflationary policies than any responsible person isnow willing to propose.

1. Output, money, interest, and prices

The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate possibilities and clarify thinking,rather than to be realistic. So I will concentrate on the simplest possiblefully-consistent model that establishes relationships among the four mainmacroeconomic aggregates: output, the money supply, the interest rate,and the price level. In this model individuals are identical and live forever,so that there are no realistic complications involving distribution withinor between generations; output is simply given (i.e., it is an endowmenteconomy - an assumption I will relax later); and the demand for money arisespurely from a "cash-in-advance" assumption: people are requiredto pay cash for goods.

Individuals are assumed to maximize their expected utility over an infinitehorizon; while the particular form of the utility function is not important,for convenience I make it logarithmic, so that individuals maximize

U = ln(c1) + D ln(c2) + D2 ln(c3)+ ...

where ct is consumption in period t, and D<1is a discount factor. In each period individuals receive an endowment yt.While I will think of this as a one-good economy, individuals cannot simplyconsume their own endowment: they must buy their consumption from someoneelse.

The purchase of goods requires cash. At the beginning of each period thereis a capital market, at which individuals can trade cash for one-periodbonds, with a nominal interest rate it. Their consumptionduring the period is then constrained by the cash with which they emergefrom this trading: the nominal value of consumption, Pt ct, cannot exceed money holdings Mt. After the capitalmarket is held, each individual purchases his desired consumption, whilereceiving cash from the sale of his own endowment. There may also be atransfer - positive or negative (a lump-sum tax) - from the government.

Finally, money is created or destroyed by the government via open marketoperations each period - that is, the government enters into the capitalmarket and buys or sells bonds. The government also makes transfers orcollects taxes (no government consumption at this point), and must obeyits own intertemporal budget constraint, which takes into account any seignoragethat may result from increases in the money supply over time.

Analyzing this model in general requires a careful specification ofthe budget constraints of both individuals and the government, and of intertemporalchoices. However, if we make some simplifying assumptions the model's implicationscan be derived with almost no algebra. Let us assume that from the secondperiod onwards output (and therefore also consumption) will remain constantat a level y*, and that the government will also hold the moneysupply constant at a level M*. Then we can immediately guess atthe solution from period 2 on: the price level will remain constant atP* = M*/y*, and the interest rate will also be constantat a rate i* = (1-D)/D. It is straightforward to confirm that thisis indeed an equilibrium: one plus the real interest rate equals the ratioof marginal utility in any two successive periods; because the nominalinterest rate is positive individuals have an incentive to acquire onlyas much cash as they need, so all money will indeed be spent on consumption.

All the action, then, goes into determining the price level and interestrate in the first period. Let us use un-subscripted letters to representfirst-period output, consumption, interest rate, etc..

Our first relationship comes from the monetary side. Under normal circumstances- that is, when the nominal interest rate is positive - individuals willhold no more cash than they need to make their consumption purchases. Sothe cash-in-advance constraint will be binding:

Pc =Py = M, so that P = M/y

So under normal circumstances there is a simple proportional relationshipbetween the money supply and the price level.

The second relationship comes from intertemporal choice. By holdingone less yen in period 1, an individual gives up 1/P units of first-periodconsumption but allows himself to consume (1+i)/P* additional unitsin period 2. At an optimum this change must leave him indifferent. Butthe marginal utility of consumption in period 1, given the assumed utilityfunction, is 1/c; the marginal utility in 2 is D/c*. It followsthat we must have 

c/c* = D-1 (P*/P)/ (1+i)

or

1+i = D-1 (c*/c) (P*/P)

or, finally, since consumption must equal output in each period,

1+i = D-1 (y*/y) (P*/P)

This says that the higher is the current price level, the lower thenominal interest rate. The easiest way to think about this is to say thatthere is an equilibrium real interest rate, D-1 (y*/y)-1, which the economy will deliver whatever the behavior of nominal prices.Meanwhile, since the future price level P* is assumed held fixed,any rise in the current level creates expected deflation; hence higherP means lower i. 

The two relationships are shown in Figure 1 as MM and CCrespectively; as drawn, they intersect at point 1, simultaneously determiningthe interest rate and the price level. It is also immediately apparentthat an increase in the first-period money supply will shift MMto the right, leading to a higher price level and a lower nominal (butnot real) interest rate.

Figure 1 While this is surely the normal case, however, there is also another possibility,to which we now turn.

2. When money becomes irrelevant

Suppose that you start with an economy in the equilibrium describedby point 1 in Figure 1, and then imagine an initial open-market operationthat increases the first-period money supply. (Throughout we imagine thatthe money supply from period 2 onwards remains unchanged - or equivalentlythat the central bank will do whatever is necessary to keep the post-2price level stable). Initially, as we have already seen, this operationwill increase the price level and reduce the interest rate. And such amonetary expansion can clearly drive the economy down the CC curveas far as point 2 in Figure 1. But what happens if the money supply isincreased still further - so that the intersection of MM and CCis at a point like 3, with a negative nominal interest rate?

The answer is clearly that the interest rate cannot go negative, becausethen money would dominate bonds as an asset. What must therefore happenis that any increase in the money supply beyond the level that would pushthe interest rate to zero is simply substituted for zero-interest bondsin individual portfolios (with the bonds being purchased by the centralbank in its open-market operation!), with no further effect on either theprice level or the interest rate. Because spending is no longer constrainedby money, the MM curve becomes irrelevant; the economy stays atpoint 2, no matter how large the money supply may be.

It is probably worth emphasizing here that the interest rate at point2 is zero only on one-period bonds; it would not be zero on longer-termbonds, such as consols. This is important if one is trying to map the modelonto the current situation in Japan, or for that matter the United Statesduring the 1930s: long rates in Japan are positive, but short-term ratesare indeed very close to zero.

A good way to think about what happens when money becomes irrelevanthere is to bear in mind that we are holding the long-run money supply fixedat M*, and therefore also the long-run price level at P*.So when the central bank increases the current money supply, it is loweringthe expected rate of money growth M*/M, and also - if it does succeedin raising the price level - the expected rate of inflation P*/P.Now what we know is that in this full employment model the economy willhave the same real interest rate whatever the central bank does.Since the nominal interest rate cannot become negative, however,the economy has a minimum rate of inflation or maximum rate of deflation.

Now suppose that the central bank in effect tries to impose a rate ofdeflation that exceeds this minimum - which it does by making the currentmoney supply M large relative to the future supply M*. Whatwill happen is that the economy will simply cease to be cash-constrained,and any excess money will have no effect: the rate of deflation will bethe maximum consistent with a zero nominal rate, and no more.

Now this may seem a silly thought experiment. Why would a central banktry to impose massive deflation? But the maximum rate of deflation neednot be large, or even positive! Suppose that the required real rate ofinterest is negative; then the economy "needs" inflation, andan attempt by the central bank to achieve price stability will lead toa zero nominal interest rate, and excess cash holdings.

The condition under which the required real interest rate is negativeis straightforward in this simple endowment economy. Market-clearing willrequire a negative real interest rate if the marginal utility of consumptionin period 2 is greater than that of consumption in period 1, which willbe the case if the economy's future output is expected to be sufficientlyless than its current output. Specifically, given the assumed utility function,the required real interest rate is negative if

y/y* > 1/D

This condition may seem peculiar. After all, we normally think of economiesas growing rather than shrinking! However, I will argue later that thereare some real-world conditions under which the idea of declining endowmentdoes not seem all that unreasonable - and that these conditions are fulfilledin Japan.

Of course, in a flexible-price economy even the necessity of a negativereal interest rate does not cause unemployment. This conclusion may surprisethose few readers who recall the tortured historical debate about the liquiditytrap, much of which focussed on the question of whether wage and priceflexibility were effective as a way of restoring full employment. In thismodel the problem does not arise - but the reason is a bit peculiar. Whathappens is that the economy deflates now in order to provide inflationlater. That is, if the current money supply is so large compared with thefuture supply that the nominal rate is zero, but the real rate needs tobe negative, P falls below P*; the public then expects theprice level to rise, and this provides the necessary negative real interestrate. And to repeat, this fall in the price occurs regardless of the currentmoney supply, because any excess money will simply be hoarded without addingto spending.

At this point we have something that is sort of like a liquidity trap:money becomes irrelevant at the margin. But aside from frustrating thecentral bank - which may have a thing about price stability, but findsitself presiding over inflation no matter what it does - this trap hasno adverse real consequences. To turn this analysis into a real problem,in both senses, we need to introduce some kind of nominal rigidity.

3. The liquidity trap

Suppose, now, that the consumption good is produced rather than simplyappearing, with a maximum productive capacity yf in period1. And suppose, also, that this productive capacity need not be fully employed.In particular, I will simply assume that the price level in period 1 ispredetermined - so that the economy now acquires a Keynesian feel, andmonetary policy can affect output. (In period 2 and subsequently outputwill still be assumed to take on the value y*). 

In this sticky-price world the level of period-1 consumption and outputmust still be equal, but now output adjusts to consumption rather thanthe other way around. Given the utility function, and the assumption thatconsumption will be y* in period 2, we can immediately write anexpression for current real consumption, which becomes the "IS curve"determining real output:

c = y = D-1 y* (P*/P) (1+i)-1

Figure 2 illustrates the joint determination of the interest rate andoutput in this case. The curve IS, as just indicated, shows how outputwill be determined by consumption demand, which is decreasing in the interestrate. Meanwhile, as long as the nominal interest rate is positive, thecash-in-advance constraint will be binding, so we will have the MMcurve 

y = M/P

Figure 2 Increasing the money supply can now increase output, up to a point - specifically,up to point 2. But what if productive capacity is at a point like 3? Thenthe same argument as in the previous section applies: since the nominalinterest rate cannot go negative, any increase in money beyond the levelthat drives the rate to zero will simply be substituted for bonds, withno effect on spending. And therefore no open-market operation, no matterhow large, can get the economy to full employment. In short, the economyis in a classic liquidity trap.

Under what conditions will a liquidity trap occur? One possibility isthat P is high compared with P* - that people expect deflation,so that even a zero nominal rate is a high real rate. The other possibility,however, is that even if prices are expected to be stable, yfis high compared with the future - or to put it differently, peoples' expectedfuture real income is low compared with the amount of consumption neededto use today's capacity. In that case, to persuade people to spend enoughnow may require a negative real interest rate, and with downwardly inflexibleprices that may not be possible.

Or to put it yet another way, one that is closer to the language ofapplied macroeconomics: if people have low expectations about their futureincomes, then even with a zero interest rate they may want to save morethan the economy can absorb. (In this case, of course, the economy cannotabsorb any savings - but I will come to that point below). And inthat case, no matter what the central bank does with the current moneysupply, it cannot reflate the economy sufficiently to restore full employment.

So we have now seen that a fully specified model, which does not fudgeeither the role of money or the necessity of making intertemporal choices,can indeed generate a liquidity trap.

4. Investment at home and abroad

A liquidity trap can happen in a very simple economy - one in whichthere is no investment, and therefore no way for consumers in the aggregateto make tradeoffs between present and future. But can it still happen oncewe allow some way to use current production to buy future consumption -either by investing at home or acquiring assets abroad?

At first sight it might seem that allowing for investment and/or foreigntrade should make nonsense of the idea that an economy needs a negativereal interest rate to generate adequate demand. After all, even with diminishingreturns the marginal product of capital is surely always positive; andone can always run a trade surplus, using the proceeds to buy foreign assetswith a positive real return. Does this eliminate the liquidity trap asan interesting possibility?

To build a fully specified model with investment would require a longerand more elaborate paper. However, it is fairly straightforward to seethat if we have a "Tobin's q" model of investment, inwhich periods of high investment are associated with a high real priceof assets, a positive marginal product of capital is no guarantee thatindividuals face a positive real rate of return. To see why, suppose thatfor whatever reason consumers right now want to save a large fraction oftheir income. In order to persuade firms to invest that much, qmust be high. But in the future, when consumers want to save less, qwill be lower. Now while an investor who buys capital now will collectany rents on the capital - which will be positive as long as the marginalproduct of capital is positive - he must also take into account the prospectivereal capital loss as q declines from its current high level to amore normal level. As a result, to get the level of investment needed toabsorb temporarily very high savings might require that investors be preparedto accept a negative real rate of return, and hence that the real interestrate be negative.

A basically similar argument applies to attempts to export savings,by investing abroad. If there are nontraded goods, export of capital willnormally be associated with a depreciation in the real exchange rate, thatis, a decline in the domestic price level compared with the foreign evenwhen measured in a common currency. So if a country needs to export a lotof capital now, to be repatriated later, it will from its own point ofview be buying foreign assets high, selling them low. Even though the realreturn in terms of foreign goods is certainly positive, the realreturn in terms of domestic consumption could well be negative.

Both of these points may be somewhat clearer if we try to think roughlyof what they might mean in Japan's case. Suppose that we postulate thateven at a zero real interest rate Japanese consumers insist on saving agreat deal right now, but will probably save much less at some future date.To induce domestic firms to invest all those savings now would requirea very high price of capital in place - say, a very high P/E ratio on Japanesestocks. But even a zero real interest rate might not be enough to get thatP/E ratio, because stock prices would be limited by the expectation ofan eventual fall. Similarly, to generate a trade surplus large enough toexport all the savings would require a very weak real yen. Yet even a zeroreal interest rate (compared with positive rates abroad) might not generatesufficient depreciation, because the prospect of eventual appreciationwould support the currency now.

So allowing for investment at home and abroad, while it may make a liquiditytrap somewhat less plausible, does not make it impossible.

5. Is Japan in a liquidity trap?

Up to this point, I have tried to demonstrate that the idea of a liquiditytrap, although originally arising in the context of a pseudo-static model,can be given a dynamically consistent interpretation. But just becausesomething is possible does not mean that it is relevant. Do we really thinkthat Japan is in a liquidity trap - and if it is, how did it get there?

An economy is in a liquidity trap if aggregate demand consistently fallsshort of productive capacity despite essentially zero short-term nominalinterest rates. Japan certainly more or less meets the interest-rate criterion:at the time of writing the overnight money-market rate was 0.37 percent.The economy also certainly seems to be operating well below capacity. True,the OECD and IMF estimates of output gap are surprisingly modest, giventhe economy's lack of real growth since 1991. However, those numbers arebased not on economic analysis but on a smoothing procedure that automaticallybuilds any sustained slump into the estimated trend in potential output(using the same procedure on the United States in the 1930s finds the economyat full capacity by 1935). If one uses even a conservative estimate ofJapanese potential growth since 1990 - say, 2 percent - the economy nowappears to be in a very deep slump indeed.

If Japan is in a liquidity trap, however, why?

In the model of sections 1-3, a liquidity trap will arise only if futureproductive capacity is actually lower than current capacity. Before looseningthat constraint, we can ask why one might expect Japan's future capacityto be relatively low compared with today's. And the obvious answer is demography:Japan's combination of declining birth rate and lack of immigration apparentlymeans a shrinking rather than growing labor force over the next severaldecades. In the absence of productivity growth, potential output, say,15 or 20 years out - y* in the model - could actually be below currentcapacity. Moreover, the labor force will drop faster than the population,because of shifting composition, so it is substantially easier to makethe case that per capita productive capacity might actually be lowerat some future date than it is today.

The case that a negative real interest rate is necessary can be strengthenedif we allow for heterogeneity among individuals plus imperfect capitalmarkets. Suppose that at any given time some people expect their futureincome to be higher than their current income, others expect it to be lower.In a perfect capital market those who expect their income to rise wouldtend to engage in dissaving. But suppose that this is difficult - thatconsumption loans are hard to come by. Then those who expect their incometo rise will not contribute as much to the demand for funds as those whoexpect it to fall contribute to the supply, and the equilibrium real interestrate will be lower than it would have been in a more efficient capitalmarket. Notice that we need not argue that Japanese capital markets areespecially inefficient: this can be viewed simply as a reason why aggregatecapacity need not actually be falling to require a negative real interestrate. But it is also true that at least some Japanese institutional pecularities- the relatively small use of credit cards, the high downpayments requiredon expensive houses (see Ito 1992) may contribute to the problem.

Moving outside the formal model, the prospects for a liquidity trapalso depend on investment demand. Here demography again comes into play:the prospective decline in the labor force reduces the expected returnon investments. And institutional problems, such as the troubles of thebanking system, may also lead to some credit rationing that deters investment.And to the extent that firms are financially constrained by the debt runup in the past, they may be unable to invest as much as they otherwisewould.

On the whole, while it is quite easy to make the case that Japan reallyis in a liquidity trap, it is much harder to give a convincing explanationof why. Demography seems to be the leading candidate; other "structural"reasons that are widely cited, while they do amount to an impressive litanyof sins, do not necessarily explain why demand should be inadequate, asopposed to simply causing garden-variety microeconomic inefficiency. Thislack of a clear link between the structural issues and the proximate problemhas some important policy implications, as we will soon see.

6. What is to be done?

Japan is an economy that is almost certainly producing well below its productivecapacity - that is, the immediate problem facing Japan is one of demand,not supply. And it gives every appearance of being in a liquidity trap- that is, conventional monetary policy appears to have been pushed toits limits, yet the economy remains depressed. What can be done? Thereseem to be three main answers: structural reform, fiscal expansion, andunconventional monetary policy. Let us consider each in turn.

Structural reform: Everyone agrees that Japan needs structuralreform: it needs to clean up its banks, deregulate its service sector,reform its corporate accounting, and so on. But while such measures willincrease the economy's microeconomic efficiency, will they help it recover?Bear in mind the trap shown in Figure 2: policy moves that increase yf,that is, which push point 3 to the right, do the economy no good if itis stuck at point 2 in any case. Measures that raise Japan's supply capacitybut leave demand where it is will not help the situation; indeed, if unemploymentrises as a result of increased efficiency the country might actually beworse off.

To be helpful in the current situation, structural reform must somehowinduce people to spend more. It is possible to imagine several ways inwhich this might happen. A reformed financial sector might be able to lendto people and firms that are now credit-constrained. Deregulation mightcreate new investment opportunities, raising investment demand. And conceivablyreform might raise expectations of future income, encouraging higher spendingnow.

The striking thing about discussion of structural reform, however, isthat when one poses the question "How will this increase demand?"- as opposed to supply - the answers are actually quite vague. I at leastam far from sure that the kinds of structural reform being urged on Japanwill increase demand at all, and see no reason to believe that even radicalreform would be enough to jolt the economy out of its current trap.

Fiscal policy: The classic Keynesian view of the liquidity trapis, of course, that it demonstrates that under some circumstances monetarypolicy is impotent, and that in such cases fiscal pump-priming is the onlyanswer. The framework here is rather different in its implications formonetary policy, but it does suggest that fiscal expansion could work.Obviously the model is subject to Ricardian equivalence, so that tax cutswould have no effect. But government purchases of goods and services inthe first period, while they would be partly offset by a reduction in privateconsumption expenditures, could indeed increase demand and output.

While this policy could work, however, is it the right one for Japan?Japan has already engaged in extensive public works spending in an unsuccessfulattempt to stimulate its economy. Much of this spending has been notoriouslyunproductive: bridges more or less to nowhere, airports few people use,etc.. True, since the economy is demand- rather than supply-constrainedeven wasteful spending is better than none. But there is a government fiscalconstraint, even if Japan has probably been too ready to use it as an excuse.And anyway, is it really true that it is impossible to use the economy'sresources to produce things people actually want?

Monetary policy: It may seem strange to return to monetary policyas an option. After all, haven't we just seen that it is ineffective? Butit is important to realize that the monetary thought experiments we haveperformed have a special characteristic: they all involve only temporarychanges in the money supply.

This point needs enlarging upon. Because the traditional IS-LM frameworkis a static one, it cannot make any distinction between temporary and permanentpolicy changes. And partly as a result, it seems to indicate that a liquiditytrap is something that can last indefinitely. But the framework here, rudimentaryas it is, suggests a quite different view. In the flexible-price versionof the model, even when money and bonds turn out to be perfect substitutesin period 1, money is still neutral - that is, an equiproportional increasein the money supply in all periods will still raise prices in thesame proportion. So what would a permanent increase in the money supplydo in the case where prices are predetermined in period 1? Even if theeconomy is in a liquidity trap in the sense that the nominal interest rateis stuck at zero, the monetary expansion would raise the expected futureprice level P*, and hence reduce the real interest rate. A permanentas opposed to temporary monetary expansion would, in other words, be effective- because it would cause expectations of inflation.

Let us now bring this discussion back to earth, and to Japan in particular.Of course the Bank of Japan does not announce whether its changes in themonetary base are permanent or temporary. But we may argue that privateactors view its actions as temporary, because they believe thatthe central bank is committed to price stability as a long-run goal. Andthat is why monetary policy is ineffective! Japan has been unable to getits economy moving precisely because the market regards the central bankas being responsible, and expects it to rein in the money supply if theprice level starts to rise.

The way to make monetary policy effective, then, is for the centralbank to credibly promise to be irresponsible - to make a persuasivecase that it will permit inflation to occur, thereby producing thenegative real interest rates the economy needs.

This sounds funny as well as perverse. Bear in mind, however, that thebasic premise - that even a zero nominal interest rate is not enough toproduce sufficient aggregate demand - is not hypothetical: it is a simplefact about Japan right now. Unless one can make a convincing case thatstructural reform or fiscal expansion will provide the necessary demand,the only way to expand the economy is to reduce the real interest rate;and the only way to do that is to create expectations of inflation.

Of course, it is not necessary that Japan do anything. In the quasi-staticIS-LM version of the liquidity trap, it appears as if the slump could goon forever. A dynamic analysis makes it clear that it is a temporary phenomenon- in the model it only lasts one period, although the length of a "period"is unclear (it could be three years, or it could be 20). Even without anypolicy action, price adjustment or spontaneous structural change will eventuallysolve the problem. In the long run Japan will work its way out of the trap,whatever the policy response. But on the other hand, in the long run ...

REFERENCES

Hicks, J.R. (1937), "Mr. Keynes and the classics", Econometrica.

Ito, Takatoshi (1992), The Japanese Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Lucas, R. (1982), "Interest rates and asset prices in a two-currencyworld", Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 3-42.


