Gender and Gender Sa ra h We iss
as the antithesis of female style. While female style is full of kembangan,
male style is less ornamented. The left and right hands bear
equally the melodic distribution, frequently reaching arrival points together.
In female style the left hand usually plays extended melodies
that span the entire range of the gender and the right hand plays intricate
time-keeping patterns. The two hands rarely reach arrival points
together. Because the melodies are not overly ornamented in inale
style, the listener can more fully appreciate the melodic and modal intentions
of the gender player. According to most players, the cengknk
(movement from one arrival point to another), wiletan (melody used
for the cengkok), and garapnn (interpretation of these melodies) are
clearer in male ~ t y l e . ~ ’
A variety of reasons are given to explain the relative lack of melodic
ornamentation in male-style genderan, ranging from an overriding
concern for modal clarity to conjecture on the relative suppleness of
male wrists. Whatever the reasons for this lack of ornamentation and
however beautifully they may play, male gender players do not create
a flowing, ceaseless line of melody as women do when accompanying
wayang. The atmosphere that they create is neither as rich nor as evocative
of the feeling of the story spun out by the dlialang as that of
female performers. Because of this and because a male player may occasionally
stop to eat and smoke or be obliged to break concentration
for an exchange of pleasantries with passing visitors, male players are
not thought to be as attentive to the needs of the performance as female
players.
The difference between the male and female styles of gender performance is
that male style can be notated. Female-style genderan cannot be written
down. If a woman is playing, her attitude is playful and flirtatious. Men
cannot do this.3*
When women play gender they are diligent and zealous, knowledgeable, enthusiastic,
they play continuously. If a man is playing, he will stop and eat
or smoke. If a man is playing, dhalutzg do not like it because they do not use
special melodies for grin?iiigai~.~~
Unlike female players, male players pride themselves on a knowledge
of the pathet system and the characteristics of the individual pathet,
which female players rarely find necessary to consider beyond its importance
to the structure of waynng. Male players vigorously discuss
various interpretations of pieces in which the modal orientation is not
immediately clear. Male players who do not have some understanding
of the intricacies of the pathet system frequently apologize for this, of-
40
Sarah Weiss Gender and Gender
ten implying that they are not yet complete musicians or that they
hope to study and become so in the future. Many male gender players
also either spend time thinlting about the seldom-performed, esoteric
pieces from the court or speak in awe of those who do command this
knowledge.
Along with ltnowledge of the system used to classify and organize
mode cotnes the notion of learned ltnowledge. It is certain that a person
who speaks easily about patliet or knows the interpretations (garapan)
of the esoteric pieces mentioned above has had some training or has
made an effort to learn about these concepts. They are not concepts that
are necessarily included in the knowledge of a person who has learned
through a lifetime of immersion in the world of wayaizg or gumelan, a
state referred to as “still natural” (nzasih alani, that is, unschooled).
Female gender players are rarely able to discuss their reasons for
choice of a particular melodic or modal interpretation beyond the inimitable
notion of feeling, or rasa. They seldom use words like cengkok
or wiletaiz. They pride themselves on the fact that they have learned
everything they know by ear through listening to other musicians.
They are nznsili a1u171.34
Another means of showing learned knowledge is an understanding
of and ability to use notation. Women players rarely can read notation
of any kind. It is commonly believed that female-style genderan, unlike
that of male players, cannot even be notated with accuracy.
In male style there is no inner essence (intisari) nor are there any ornaments
(sari-sari, another Javanese word for llower). It is too simple. It can be notated
and it is more regular and ordered (diatirri). In the past my mother
was my favorite accompanist. Now I have to use a male player because there
are no women left who know my style.35
In actuality, neither style can be notated accurately with the cipher
notation system commonly used for Central Javanese music. ‘rhat,
between what is said or believed about male and female styles is the
clear tendency to connect men and inale style with the notions of order,
control, refinement, learned knowledge, the court, and its rules of hierarchy,
aspects that are valued by men in the male world. Women and
female style are associated with uncontrollable disorder, untaught
knowledge, and expressed emotions, aspects that are frightening to men
precisely because of their unpredictability. It is because women are not
concerned with their status vis-h-vis the male valuation system or any
of the other structures designed for the imposition of order that they
43
however, is not the point.36 Rather, what emerges from this compi L 1lSOll I‘