This is the html version of the file http://tcc.itc.it/people/pianta/publications/wse2003clustKeywords.pdf.
G o o g l e automatically generates html versions of documents as we crawl the web.
To link to or bookmark this page, use the following url: http://www.google.com/search?q=cache:tISf0BNXDpsJ:tcc.itc.it/people/pianta/publications/wse2003clustKeywords.pdf+keyword+extraction&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=6&gl=us&client=firefox-a

Google is neither affiliated with the authors of this page nor responsible for its content.
These search terms have been highlighted: 	keyword 	extraction 
Page 1
Using Keyword Extraction for Web Site Clustering
Paolo Tonella, Filippo Ricca, Emanuele Pianta and Christian Girardi
ITC-irst
Centro per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica
38050 Povo (Trento), Italy
tonella, ricca, pianta, cgirardi @itc.it
Abstract
Reverse engineering techniques have the potential to
support Web site understanding, by providing views that
show the organization of a site and its navigational struc-
ture. However, representing each Web page as a node in the
diagrams that are recovered from the source code of a Web
site leads often to huge and unreadable graphs. Moreover,
since the level of connectivity is typically high, the edges in
such graphs make the overall result still less usable.
Clustering can be used to produce cohesive groups of
pages that are displayed as a single node in reverse engi-
neered diagrams. In this paper, we propose a clustering
method based on the automatic extraction of the keywords
of a Web page. The presence of common keywords is ex-
ploited to decide when it is appropriate to group pages to-
gether. A second usage of the keywords is in the automatic
labeling of the recovered clusters of pages.
1 Introduction
Web sites often evolve from small and simple collections
of purely HTML pages to big and complex applications, of-
fering advanced transaction and data access facilities. The
navigation structure is also subject to a similar trend. While
initially only a few navigation facilities are needed, as the
complexity grows, more advanced and intricate connections
are provided. Lack of an established Web engineering prac-
tice is often the reason for a drift in the overall organization
of the Web site. Cumulative maintenance interventions and
successive radical changes may result in a ìlegacyî Web
site, that can be hardly evolved in a safe and controlled way.
Tools and techniques are being developed to support
understanding and restructuring of existing Web applica-
tions [4, 8, 11]. Software clustering [1, 6] aims at gather-
ing software components into higher level groupings, thus
providing the user with a more abstract, overall view of the
system under analysis. It can be similarly adapted to the
Web context, in order to produce a high level view of the
Web site organization, in terms of cohesive groups (clus-
ters) of pages and of the relationships among them. Such
a view can be exploited in the process of Web site under-
standing, to gain knowledge about the organization of the
entire site. More detailed information can be obtained by
exploding each cluster of interest into subclusters, up to the
individual pages that are the object of the change.
Web site clustering involves several non obvious deci-
sions that profoundly affect the final result. First of all, the
features used to describe each Web page have to be deter-
mined. These are the basic properties used to measure the
similarity between pages, which in turn determines when
two pages are clustered together. Several completely differ-
ent choices are possible, ranging from the Web site connec-
tivity [4], to the page structure [9], or to the content. The
precise similarity measure, as well as the clustering algo-
rithm in use, are other important parameters.
After computing the clusters for a Web site, a Web devel-
oper can access them to understand the overall organization
of the system. However, to be meaningful, clusters should
be properly labeled. A high level view showing just blank
boxes (clusters) connected with each other, or, at the other
extreme, labeled with all included pages, is by no means
very informative and helpful. On the other side, a man-
ual labeling process (concept assignment [4]) might be very
difficult and time consuming. Some degree of automatic
cluster labeling is thus another crucial feature for a practi-
cal usage of clustering in Web site evolution.
In this paper, we consider the page content as the basic
feature used to cluster a Web site. Summary information
about a page is obtained by means of keyword extraction.
The same technique is exploited to attack the problem of
cluster labeling. The keyword with the highest score within
each cluster is used as cluster label. Preliminary experimen-
tal results confirm the feasibility of the approach.
The paper is organized as follows: the next section con-
trasts the existing literature with our proposal. Then, a brief
summary on clustering methods is provided to make the pa-
Page 2
per self-contained (Section 3). In Section 4, the Natural
Language Processing (NLP) method of keyword extraction
is presented. The next section describes our clustering algo-
rithm based on the keywords associated to each Web page,
as well as our automatic cluster labeling technique. A case
study is commented in Section 6. Conclusions and future
work are given in the last section.
2 Related work
Clustering has several uses in program understanding
and software reengineering [1, 6, 12], and has been recently
applied to Web applications [4, 5, 9].
In [4] an approach to support the comprehension of Web
applications by exploiting clustering techniques has been
proposed. The approach is based on a conceptual model of a
Web application and on a similarity measure between com-
ponents that takes into account both the type and the topol-
ogy of the links. This measure is exploited by a hierarchical
clustering algorithm which produces a hierarchy of system
partitions. Download and comprehension of the considered
Web applications are conducted using the reverse engineer-
ing tool WARE.
Our approach introduces one major improvement over
the technique described in [4]: automatic cluster labeling,
and differs mainly in one respect: the basic feature exploited
for clustering, which is the page content instead of its con-
nectivity. In fact, content plays a very important role in Web
applications and it can be hypothesized that it represents a
good starting point for clustering. On the other side, the
connectivity of a Web application suffers from a problem,
highlighted also by the authors of [4]: purely navigational
links (such as those leading to the home page) can hardly be
distinguished from semantically richer ones. Labels in [4]
(named concepts) are assigned to clusters manually. In our
approach, labels assignment is handled in a completely au-
tomatic way.
In [5] an approach to identify duplicated pages (i.e.,
clones) in a Web application is proposed. Two different
methods based on different similarity measures have been
defined and experimented with: one exploiting the edit
distance and the other one based on the frequency of the
HTML tags in a page. The underlying descriptive feature
(the HTML structure of a page) can be used as a further
basic feature for clustering. This feature was actually ex-
ploited in [9], where an approach is presented for the iden-
tification of Web pages that can be migrated to a dynamic
version, in that they share a similar structure.
3 Clustering
Clustering is a general technique aimed at gathering the
entities that compose a system into cohesive groups (clus-
ters). Given a system consisting of entities which are char-
acterized by a vector of properties and are connected by mu-
tual relationships, there are two main approaches to cluster-
ing [1]: the sibling link and the direct link approach. In the
sibling link approach, entities are grouped together when
they possess similar properties, while in the direct link ap-
proach they are grouped together when the mutual relation-
ships form a highly interconnected sub-graph.
In the literature there exist several different clustering al-
gorithms [12], with different properties. Hierarchical algo-
rithms do not produce a single partition of the system. Their
output is rather a tree, with the root consisting of one cluster
enclosing all entities, and the leaves consisting of single-
ton clusters. At each intermediate level, a partition of the
system is available, with the number of clusters increasing
while moving downward in the tree. Divisive algorithms
start from the whole system at the tree root, and then divide
it into smaller clusters, attached as tree children. Alterna-
tively, agglomerative algorithms start from singleton clus-
ters and join them together incrementally.
3.1 Agglomerative hierarchical clustering
The agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm
builds a hierarchy of clusterings starting from the bottom
of the hierarchy, where each entity is in a different clus-
ter. In each following step, the two most similar clusters
are joined. After
∆   Ω
steps (with
∆
the number of enti-
ties), all entities are grouped into one cluster. Each level in
the hierarchy defines a partition of clusters (i.e., a cluster-
ing). To select the resulting clustering, a cut point has to be
determined.
We have adapted the agglomerative hierarchical algo-
rithm known as Johnsonís algorithm [12] to our purposes:
1. begin with
∆
clusters, each containing one Web page
(
∆
is the number of Web pages in the Web site), and
compute distance between pages (using the comple-
ment of the similarity measure).
2. while there are more than 1 cluster do
(a) find the pair of clusters at least distance;
(b) merge these clusters into a new cluster;
(c) update the distance measures between each pair
of clusters.
end while
To update the distance measure between clusters, we
have chosen the so called complete linkage rule [1]. This
rule states that the distance measure between the already
existing cluster
and a new cluster , formed by joining
clusters
and , is the minimum between dist(
) and
dist(
). It privileges cohesion over coupling [1].
Page 3
4 Keyword extraction
To the aim of clustering Web pages having similar con-
tent, we need to characterize the content of a document in a
way that is simple and computationally tractable. Also, the
representation of the text content must be suitable for calcu-
lating efficiently content similarity measures between texts.
A list of the most relevant keywords in the document can
be used for this purpose. This approach is used for instance
in [10].
The most simple approach to the extraction of the key-
words of a text is based on finding the most frequent words
in the text. The basic intuition underlying this approach is
that the most important concepts in the texts are likely to
be referred to repeatedly, or, at least, more frequently than
minor concepts. Even if we think that this basic intuition
is sensible, simply counting the most frequent words in a
document is not enough to achieve our goal. The basic ap-
proach needs to be refined in a number of ways, that will be
analyzed in the rest of this section.
Firstly, we need to consider lexical units that are wider
than simple words. Not only can a concept be referred to
with more than a word, that is a phrase, but often the con-
cepts that characterize a text most precisely are the most
specific ones, which are usually expressed with complex
phrases. For this reason as a first attempt in this direction
we considered as units both single words and bigrams, that
is contiguous sequences of two words. Let us refer to one
of these units (mono- or bigrams) as a term.
Secondly a term can occur frequently in a text without
characterizing the text in contrast with other texts. This
happens when all the texts that we are trying to cluster are
about the same broad topic. For instance, if all the texts we
are processing belong to the portal of a telephone company,
we may find out that the terms îtelephone lineî or, even
worse, îtelephoneî are not useful to characterize the mean-
ing of a document even if they occur repeatedly. To avoid
this problem the frequency of a term in a document must be
confronted with the average frequency of that term in the
whole Web site.
4.1 Bigrams selection
Not all bigrams in a text should be considered as terms
to our purposes. We are mainly interested in three classes of
complex terms: named entities, complex lexical units, and
recurrent free phrases. Named entities are terms referring
to individuals, locations, organizations, and dates. Com-
plex lexical units are the kind of multi-word expressions
that can be found in dictionaries (for instance phrasal verbs
such as îput onî and idiomatic expressions such as îroller
coasterî). Finally, the notion of recurrent free phrase was
introduced by [2] to refer to a free combination of words
which is recurrently used to refer to a concept. They are
characterized by either high frequency in a reference cor-
pus (e.g. îAmerican governmentî), high degree of associa-
tion between words (e.g. îfirst timeî), or high salience (e.g.
îinternational summitî).
Selecting the bigrams belonging to each of these three
classes is a challenging and resource demanding task. How-
ever the task can be appoximated by resorting to a combina-
tion of simple statistical measures and elementary linguistic
knowledge. Our strategy consists in selecting as candidate
keywords in a document the bigrams that where found in a
list of frequent Italian bigrams. We built the list of frequent
Italian bigrams with the following procedure: (1) select the
topmost frequent bigrams in a reference corpus of 32 mil-
lion words from an Italian newspaper; (2) cut off all bigrams
occurring less than 4 times in the reference corpus; (3) ap-
ply a filter based on stop words. The aim of the filtering step
is to get rid of bigrams like îwith theî or îthe onlyî which
may occur frequently in texts but do not belong to any of
the term classes mentioned above. To this extent we sim-
ply reject all bigrams including at least a word taken from
a list of stop words. Note that stop words are in the great
majority function words, that is words belonging to closed
classes. Thus it makes sense to compile a list of stop words
manually. The stop word list turned out to be very usuful to
exclude frequent but irrelevant bigrams. Note that the words
in the stopword list where excluded also from the topmost
frequent monograms of the document.
4.2 Inverse document frequency
To better characterize each Web page to be clustered, we
rank its keywords. A simple solution could be just counting
the number of occurrences of the terms in the page (term
frequency in Information Retrieval jargon). However this
might not be an appropriate choice, as terms which occur
uniformly in all the Web pages that we are clustering are
not useful to distinguish documents with similar content as
opposed to relatively unrelated documents. In alternative,
we can rank the keywords on the basis of the inverse docu-
ment frequency [7], defined as:
œ
∆
–”
(1)
where
∆
is the absolute number of occurrences of the -
th keyword,
is the number of documents containing it,
and
is the total number of documents.
High frequency keywords that are specific to a document
(
small compared to ) have a high value of the inverse
document frequency. On the contrary, unspecific keywords
(i.e., keywords that occur uniformly in most documents) are
given a small weight (
–”¥
µ
is close to zero, since
).
Page 4
5 Web site clustering and labeling
Let
√œ
be the vector of all keywords determined for
a whole Web site (union of the keywords determined for
each page), with each keyword uniquely represented by a
single entry. A feature vector can be built for each page
‘
,
with
∆
, the number of occurrences of the -th keyword
√œ
in
‘
, in position . When a keyword is not present
in a page
‘
, the related entry in the feature vector is 0. Al-
ternatively, the absolute number of occurrences
∆
can
be replaced by the inverse frequency in the document
œ
(see equation (1)).
Given the description of each Web site page in terms of
feature vectors, it is possible to exploit similarity or dis-
tance measures to agglomerate entities into clusters. Simi-
larity/distance between clusters is generalized from the sim-
ilarity/distance between entities by means of the complete
linkage rule (see Section 3). In this work, we preferred
a similarity measure over a distance measure, because the
latter is prone to the well known problem of the sparse or
empty vectors: distances become small not only when vec-
tors are close to each other, but also when they are very
sparse (or empty), thus leading to the formation of inappro-
priate clusters. The similarity measure used with the feature
vectors described above is the normalized vector product,
given by:
◊—¥‘ ’µ
Œ
‘
Œ
’
Œ
‘
Œ
’
(2)
where
Œ
‘
and
Œ
’
are the feature vectors of pages
‘
and
’
respectively, angular brackets indicate the scalar product,
which is normalized by the product of the norms, thus giv-
ing a similarity measure which ranges from 0 to 1.
After executing the agglomerative clustering algorithm,
a proper cut point is manually selected. The possibility for
the user to choose a given abstraction level (number of clus-
ters or, equivalently, cut point), and then to adjust it toward
the top of the hierarchy (less clusters with more pages in-
side) or toward the bottom (more clusters containing fewer
pages) is an important interactive facility. In fact, the right
abstraction level, appropriate for the ongoing program un-
derstanding task, is typically not known a priori, and can be
determined empirically by moving upward and downward
in the clustering hierarchy.
Then, labels are automatically assigned to each cluster.
The keyword with the highest number of occurrences (resp.,
highest inverse document frequency) in a cluster
is as-
signed to
as its label. It should be noted that while the
overall number of occurrences of a keyword
√œ
in a
cluster
is just the sum of the number of occurrences in
each contained pages, the inverse document frequency is
computed by applying equation (1) to entire clusters:
be-
comes the number of clusters, and
the number of clus-
ters containing the keyword
√œ
.
6 Case Study
In order to illustrate the proposed technique, a small
Web application (www.promoturpejo.it) has been
analyzed. Www.promoturpejo.it is a bi-lingual (Ital-
ian and English) Web application that promotes the Pejoís
Valley, a pleasant valley in Trentino (Italy). This dynamic
Web application has been downloaded and analyzed by
means of the tool ReWeb [8]. It consists of 240 HTML
pages (57183 LOC), grouped into 9 directories and con-
nected by 7107 hyperlinks.
The graph representation of a Web application (where
nodes represent pages and edges represent hyperlinks
among pages) can be abstracted by grouping pages accord-
ing to the directory containing them. If no organization into
directories is present, such a view (named System View in
ReWeb), contains a single node representing the root direc-
tory (indicated with a dot). Otherwise, a node for each di-
rectory is added. An edge connects two nodes
Ω
and
æ
of
the System View if, in the graph representation of the site,
there is a page in the directory associated to
Ω
connected
to a page in the directory of
æ
.
Figure 1 shows the System View of www.promotur-
pejo.it as recovered by ReWeb. The proposed clus-
tering technique has been applied to this Web site. The
results of clustering have been assessed by measuring the
distance from a reference grouping (gold standard) of the
pages in the Web site, produced manually. The gold stan-
dard approach (expert criterion in [1]) is a general evalua-
tion method that is used to measure the performance (for ex-
ample, in terms of precision/recall) of an algorithm which
approximates an ìideal solutionî to a problem. The gold
standard is such ìidealî solution to the problem.
To determine the gold standard, we have used the direc-
tory structure as a starting point, since in our example it is
quite meaningful. Actually, two gold standards have been
determined manually at different abstraction levels. One, la-
beled High-level, is composed of 13 groups, while the other
(Low-level) is composed of 25 groups. The second is a spe-
cialization of the first, in that each group of pages in the first
gold standard is possibly divided into subgroups. For exam-
ple the pages contained in the directory micologia (my-
cology), a subdirectory of estate (summer) which forms
a group in the High-level gold standard, are divided into two
groups in the Low-level gold standard. One group contains
mushroom cards, while the other group contains the pages
that provide general mycology information.
The clustering algorithm has been applied to two differ-
ent sets of vectors: ípromotour-vectorsí and ípromotour-
vectors-normí (obtained by computing the document in-
Page 5
.
pejo
(Pejoís Valley)
ricettivita
(accommodation)
comearrivare
(how to reach us)
lastita
(last minute)
parcodellostelvio
(Stelvio National Park)
termeita
(thermal baths)
inverno
(winter)
estate
(summer)
eng
Figure 1.
System View of the Web application
www.promoturpejo.it
. The node with a dot represents the root
directory. English translations of directory names are provided in brackets.
verse frequency, see equation (1)). In both cases, 166 pos-
sible partitions, starting with a partition consisting of one
cluster enclosing all pages, at the top of the hierarchy, down
to a partition with singleton clusters only, at the bottom of
the hierarchy, have been obtained.
By inspecting the steps of hierarchy formation, it is ap-
parent that the technique works well. Pages of animals and
pages promoting hotels/residences are respectively grouped
together already at the cut point 20. At the cut point 60
(using ípromotour-vectorsí), where 18 clusters are present,
some other interesting groupings appear. In particular, the
cluster of mushrooms cards, the cluster of hotels, the cluster
of animals, and the cluster of flowers are emerging.
It can be noted that the clusterings most similar to the
gold standard (both Low-level and High-level and using
indifferently ípromotour-vectorsí or ípromotour-vectors-
normí) are those at a cut point between 115 and 150. With a
cut point greater than 150, the algorithm groups too much,
unifying clusters of pages with quite different contents. For
example, the algorithm groups animals with countries at cut
point 151, and sports with hotels at cut point 158.
For each possible partition, a measure of precision and
recall with respect to the gold standard has been computed.
Precision and recall are defined as in [1, 3], using the notion
of intra pair. Intra pairs are pairs of pages in a same cluster.
Precision and recall are defined by comparing the intra pairs
in the gold standard and those in the clustering under test:
Ø
Precision: Percentage of intra pairs in the test cluster-
ing that are also in the gold standard.
Ø
Recall: Percentage of intra pairs in the gold standard
that are also in the test clustering.
For each possible partition produced by our clustering
method, we have plotted (recall, precision) couples at in-
creasing cut points. Both Low-level (LL) and High-level
(HL) gold standards have been considered (resp. Figure 2
and 3). The extremes of the curves are reached at the top
(resp. bottom) of the clustering hierarchy. At one extreme,
only one cluster contains all pages, so that all intra pairs of
the gold standard are also intra pair in the only cluster (re-
call equal to 1), but many intra pairs in such cluster are not
intra pairs in the gold standard (low precision). At the other
extreme, the opposite is true: no error is in the singleton
clusters, since they do not contain any intra pair (precision
1), but not correct intra pair is retrieved (recall 0).
Page 6
LL-N
LL
recall
precision
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 2.
Precision/recall at increasing cut points for
the
Low-level
(LL) gold standard. Line LL is based
on feature vectors with number of occurrences, while
LL-N exploits the inverse document frequency.
Figure 2 contrasts the precision/recall plots obtained
using the ípromotour-vectorsí (dotted line) and the
ípromotour-vectors-normí (solid line), for the LL gold stan-
dard. It is quite clear that the clustering algorithm gives
better results with input ípromotour-vectors-normí. A good
compromise of precision and recall in the LL-N curve is
reached at the cut point 149 where the recall is 0.97 and
precision is 0.72. This corresponds to the point near the top
right corner of the figure.
Figure 3 is similar to Figure 2, but based on the HL gold
standard. In this figure, the improvement deriving from
the document inverse frequency computation is less evident.
The HL-N curve remains under HL at high recall and low
precision values (approximately, up to 0.75 of recall), while
the trend is inverted afterwords.
Then, we have computed cluster labels for the cluster-
ing number 149, judged a good trade-off between precision
and recall with respect to the LL gold standard, based on
ípromotour-vectors-normí. The result, restricted to the first
7 labels extracted and disregarding clusters composed of
only one page, is shown in Table 1. In all cases, the cluster
labeling algorithm reports labels that are related to the con-
tent of the respective clusters. In some cases (clusters 1, 3
and 9) the first automatically extracted label is the same as
the label chosen by the expert. In other cases, the expertís
label is present, but it is not at the top of the generated list
(clusters 2, 4 and 8). In the remaining cases (clusters 5, 6
HL-N
HL
recall
precision
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 3.
Precision/recall at increasing cut points for
the
High-level
(HL) gold standard. Line HL is based
on feature vectors with number of occurrences, while
HL-N exploits the inverse document frequency.
and 7), the expertís label does not appear directly in the list,
but it is possible to find synonyms (cluster 6, treatment), or
specific cases (cluster 7, eurorafting, canyoning) of general
concepts (cluster 7, water sports).
Using the keyword with the highest score (the first in
the list of extracted labels) as cluster label, it is possible to
automatically produce the Clustering View in Figure 4. In
the Clustering View each node represents a cluster and is
labeled with the first label generated by the cluster label-
ing algorithm. An edge connects two nodes
Ω
and
æ
of
the clustering view if, in the complete view produced by
ReWeb (Graph View), there is a page in the cluster associ-
ated to
Ω
connected to a page in the cluster
æ
. Not all labels
produced automatically are completely satisfactory. A final
manual refinement step is necessary to obtain a meaningful
and usable view. However, even in the cases where an au-
tomatically produced label was changed, availability of an
ordered list of automatically extracted labels was extremely
useful in selecting the final label.
A comparison of the Clustering View in Figure 4 with
the System View in Figure 1 (excluding nodes . eng,
lastita and comearrivare) reveals that that there is a
good agreement, although the former is more detailed than
the latter. As noted above, the organization of this Web site
into directories was judged a good and meaningful one, so
that the ability of clustering to match it indicates that the
algorithm is performing quite well. In other words, if the
Page 7
Cluster
Expertís label
Automatic labeling (ordered)
1
appartamenti
appartamenti prossimitaí agenzia mt scheda cogolo situati
(apartments)
(apartments proximity agency mt card cogolo located)
2
fauna
settore fauna vive aquila mammiferi uccelli cervo
(fauna)
(area fauna live eagle mammalians birds deer)
3
paesi, valle e tradizioni
paese chiesa comasine cellentino strombiano valle celledizzo
(towns, valley and traditions)
(town church comasine cellentino strombiano valley celledizzo)
4
hotels e inverno
sala camera servizi sci accesso apertura hotel
(hotels and winter)
(hall room services ski admittance opening hotel)
5
sport estivi e trekking
cima hotel rifugio sentiero malga scheda sport
(summer sports and trekking)
(peak hotel refuge path alpine-hut card sport)
6
terapie
azione cura malattie acque proprietaí convenzioni specializzazione
(therapies)
(action treatment illness waters property convention specialization)
7
sport díacqua
eurorafting discesa torrentismo idrospeed sport rafting ponte
(water sports)
(eurorafting descent canyoning idrospeed sport rafting bridge)
8
funghi schede
cappello gambo schede carne ricette funghi lamelle
(mushrooms cards)
(cap-of-mushroom stem cards meat recipes mushrooms lamellae)
9
flora
flora fioritura fiori foglie primula specie semi
(flora)
(flora flowering flowers leaves primrose species seeds)
Table 1. Labels extracted automatically for clustering 149. English translations are given under the corresponding
Italian terms. Names of towns are in italic and not translated.
same Web site had been organized as a flat collection of
pages stored in one directory, clustering would be able to
reconstruct a meaningful directory organization.
The node estate (summer) in the System View is de-
composed, in the Clustering View, into three different clus-
ters (corresponding to three subdirectories of estate),
numbered 5, 8, and 9 in Table 1. Node parcodel-
lostelvio is decomposed into two clusters: fauna (clus-
ter 2) and flora (cluster 9), two subdirectories of par-
codellostelvio. The node pejo corresponds to clus-
ter 3 and termeita to cluster 6. In one case two nodes of
the System View correspond to one cluster in the Clustering
View: cluster 4 groups pages of the directories inverno
and ricettivitaí, although not all of the pages in the
latter directory. Actually, Web pages promoting hotels and
apartments (directory ricettivitaí) advertise winter
sports that are contained in the directory inverno. This
is why they are inserted into a same cluster. Some of the
pages associated with the node ricettivitaí belong to
cluster 1. These are the pages that deal with apartments, and
are all contained in a subdirectory of ricettivitaí.
7 Conclusions and future work
A preliminary exploration on the usage of Web clus-
tering in support to program understanding has been con-
ducted. A static Web site, containing various touristic infor-
mation about a valley in the Alps, has been clustered, group-
ing together pages that are characterized by common key-
words. Nodes in the resulting diagram (Clustering View)
have been automatically labeled by the highest score key-
word in each cluster.
A reference clustering (gold standard) was defined to as-
sess the performances of our algorithm. In the clustering
hierarchy, a cut point was selected giving the best compro-
mise between precision and recall. The two performance
values for such clustering are: precision = 0.72 and recall
= 0.97. They are pretty high, thus indicating that the algo-
rithm gets close to the expertís decomposition of the Web
site.
Automatic labeling of the clusters gave also good results.
In 3 cases the expertís label was the highest score keyword.
In 3 cases it was among the keywords, although not the first
one. In 3 cases it could be abstracted from the keywords.
Although not always perfect, automatically extracted labels
provide a remarkable support in interpreting the nodes of
the Clustering View. While it is a very easy task to deter-
mine meaningful cluster names out of the keyword list, the
same is not true if the names (or the entire contents) of the
pages inserted into a cluster have to be inspected.
Our future work will be devoted to applying our method
to more dynamic Web sites, trying to analyze the textual
information that can be associated to comments and iden-
tifiers of script portions in dynamic Web pages. Moreover,
we will consider the problem of contrasting the proposed
clustering method against alternative ones.
Page 8
1: appartamenti
(appartaments)
2: settore [fauna]
(area [fauna])
3: paese [paesi]
(town [towns])
4: sala [hotels/inverno]
(hall [hotels/winter])
5: cima [soprt estivi]
(peak [summer sports])
6: azione [terapie]
(action [therapies])
7: eurorafting [sport díacqua]
(eurorafting [water sports])
8: cappello [funghi]
(cap-of-mushroom [mushrooms])
9: flora
(flora)
Figure 4.
The
Clustering View
of
Promoturpejo
. English translations are in brackets, manually refined labels in square
brackets.
References
[1] N. Anquetil and T. C. Lethbridge. Experiments with clus-
tering as a software remodularization method. In Proc.
of the 6th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering
(WCREí99), pages 235ñ255, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Octo-
ber 1999. IEEE Computer Society.
[2] L. Bentivogli and E. Pianta. Beyond lexical units: Enriching
wordnets with phrasets. In Proceedings of the Research Note
Sessions of the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACLí03),
pages 67ñ70, Budapest, Hungary, April 2003.
[3] J. Davey and E. Burd. Evaluating the suitability of data clus-
tering for software remodularization. In Proc. of the Seventh
Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (WCREí00),
pages 268ñ277, Brisbane, Australia, November 2000. IEEE
Computer Society.
[4] G. A. D. Lucca, A. R. Fasolino, U. D. Carlini, F. Pace, and
P. Tramontana. Comprehending web applications by a clus-
tering based approach. In Proc. of the 10th International
Workshop on Program Comprehension (IWPC), pages 261ñ
270, Paris, France, June 2002. IEEE Computer Society.
[5] G. A. D. Lucca, M. D. Penta, and A. R. Fasolino. An ap-
proach to identify duplicated web pages. In Proc. of the 26th
Annual International Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC), pages 481ñ486, Oxford, England,
August 2002. IEEE Computer Society.
[6] S. Mancoridis, B. S. Mitchell, Y. Chen, and E. R. Gansner.
Using automatic clustering to produce high-level system or-
ganizations of source code. In Proc. of the International
Workshop on Program Comprehension, pages 45ñ52, Ischia,
Italy, 1998.
[7] C. D. Manning and H. Schtze. Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. The Mit Press, Cambridge
MA, 1999.
[8] F. Ricca and P. Tonella. Analysis and testing of web appli-
cations. In Proc. of ICSE 2001, International Conference
on Software Engineering, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, May
12-19, pages 25ñ34, 2001.
[9] F. Ricca and P. Tonella. Using clustering to support the mi-
gration from static to dynamic web pages. In Proc. of the In-
ternational Workshop on Program Comprehension (IWPC),
pages 207ñ216, Portland, Oregon, USA, May 2003. IEEE
Computer Society.
[10] J. F. Silva, J. Mexia, A. Coelho, and G. P. Lopes. Mul-
tilingual document clustering, cluster topic extraction and
data transformation. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
(Progress in Artificial Intelligence), 2258:74ñ87, 2001.
[11] P. Warren, C. Boldyreff, and M. Munro. The evolution of
websites. In Proc. of the International Workshop on Pro-
gram Comprehension, pages 178ñ185, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
May 1999.
[12] T. Wiggerts. Using clustering algorithms in legacy systems
remodularization. In Proc. of the 4th Working Conference
on Reverse Engineering (WCRE), pages 33ñ43. IEEE Com-
puter Society, 1997.
